ns and emotionless, monotone speech, while in-appropriate affect is characterized by laughing when nothingfunny has happened, crying when nothing sad has happenedor getting angry when nothing upsetting has happened.
nBehavioural disturbances in four important areas:
1. odd mannerisms, such as repetitive movements or
behaviours and odd facial expressions (e.g. grimaces);
2. a signiﬁcant lack of motivation, called avolition;3. difﬁculty taking care of themselves, including basic life
skills such as paying bills, shopping, and dressing; and
4. poor social skills, being socially withdrawn, and having
disturbed relationships with others (the nature of inter-personal relationships plays a key role in the course ofthe disorder).
The symptoms of schizo-
phrenia are grouped into twocategories: positive and negat-ive symptoms. Positive symp-
toms indicate the presence 
of something unusual (suchas hallucinations, delusions,odd speech and inappropriateaffect) and negative symptoms
indicate the absence of some-thing normal (such as goodsocial skills, appropriate affect,motivation and life skills).The course of schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a chronic disorder. Although some people havebrief episodes of schizophrenic-like behaviour (called brief re-active psychoses), most people with schizophrenia suffer fromsymptoms for their entire lives.
One common course of schizophrenia is a period of negat-
ive symptoms and odd behaviour during which the person’s functioning slowly deteriorates (the prodromal phase), followedby a ‘ﬁrst break’ – the ﬁrst episode of positive symptoms. Somepeople experience an episode of positive symptoms with a fewwarning signs beforehand. The manifestation of symptoms can also take a number of different forms. For example, somepeople may be delusional but still be able to take basic care of themselves, carry on a conversation and succeed in school and work, whereas others may be completely debilitated by the disorder.
Schizophrenia typically has its onset in late adolescence or
early adulthood. Although it can start in childhood, this is quiterare. Sufferers don’t necessarily deteriorate over time, but theydo have relapses into episodes of positive symptoms.
Causes of schizophrenia and factors 
affecting its course
1 Genetic and biological factors These account for our initial
vulnerability to schizophrenia, although exactly how they do sois unclear.
What is clear is that schizophrenia tends to be inherited. For
example, monozygotic twins have the highest concordance rates
for schizophrenia (Gottesman, 1991), meaning that they are more likely to both have schizophrenia if one of them has it, com-pared to people who shareless genetic material (such asdizygotic twins or siblings).Interestingly, schizophrenicsparanoid delusions elaborate set 
of beliefs, commonly experienced byschizophrenics, characterized by signi-ﬁcant distrust of others and feelings ofpersecution
positive symptoms in schizophrenia,
symptoms that indicate the presence ofsomething unusual, such as hallucina-tions, delusions, odd speech and inap-propriate affect
negative symptoms in schizophrenia,
symptoms that indicate the absence ofsomething normal, such as good socialskills, appropriate affect, motivation andlife skillsconcordance rates the extent to which
people show the same disorders
Pioneer
Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926), a German psychiatrist and
one of the founding fathers of modern psychiatry, madethree primary contributions to the ﬁeld of mental illness.First, Kraepelin believed that mental illness was caused bybiological factors. His work in this area helped deﬁne theﬁeld of biological psychiatry and research now supports astrong biological basis for some of the disorders in whichKraepelin was most interested (e.g. schizophrenia andbipolar disorder). Second, Kraepelin laid the foundation formodern classiﬁcation systems used to diagnose mental dis-orders, which use patterns of symptoms rather than anyone symptom in isolation. This led to his third contribu-tion, which was the classiﬁcation of and distinctionbetween schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.PSY_C15.qxd  1/2/05  3:43 pm  Page 321322322 Abnormal Psychology
and their close family members show some similar types of neuro-
psychological functioning, even if these family members do notsuffer from the illness itself. This suggests that it may be the bio-logical risk factors for schizophrenia that are inherited from fam-ily members, rather than the disorder itself (Cannon et al., 1994).
Adoption studies also support the notion of genetic trans-
mission of vulnerability to schizophrenia. Children born to aschizophrenic parent and adopted away to a non-schizophrenicparent are more likely to have schizophrenia, compared to chil-dren born to a non-schizophrenic parent (Kety et al., 1994). How-ever, one study has shown that adopted-away children with agenetic predisposition to schizophrenia are more likely to becomeschizophrenic if they are also raised in a disturbed family envir-onment. This supports a diathesis–stress model of schizophrenia(Tienari et al., 1987).
Several biological problems may cause schizophrenia, as vari-
ous forms of brain dysfunction occur among sufferers, includingenlarged ventricles, reduced blood ﬂow to frontal brain regionsand an excess of dopamine (Andreasen et al., 1992; Davis et al.,1991; Flaum et al., 1995). But we don’t know for sure whetherthese problems are a cause or a consequence of the disorder.
A current debate focuses on the neurodegenerative hypothesis
(that schizophrenia leads to progressively deteriorating brain func-tioning) versus the neurodevelopmental hypothesis (that braindeﬁcits are present at birth, inﬂuence the onset of schizophreniaand remain fairly stable). Research supports the neurodevelop-mental hypothesis, but there is also evidence that the brains ofsome schizophrenic people show greater deterioration over timethan would otherwise be expected.
2 Psychosocial factors An early hypothesis of the ‘schizo-
phrenogenic mother’ suggested that inadequate parenting causes
schizophrenia (e.g. Arieti,1955). There is absolutely no evidence of this, nor thatany psychosocial factors cause
schizophrenia. The evid ence
overwhelmingly points to
genetic and biological factors as providing the initial vulner-ability. But there is evidence, consistent with a diathesis–stressmodel, that psychological and social factors inﬂuence the courseof schizophrenia, such as the timing of onset and the likelihood of relapse.
The most well researched
psychosocial predictor of thecourse of schizophrenia is aphenomenon called expressed
emotion (EE) . This doesn’t
refer to the level of emotionthe sufferer expresses, as the
name implies, but to a speciﬁc set of feelings and beha-viours directed at people with schizophrenia by their familymembers. A family that is high in EE tends to be critical andresentful of their schizophrenic relative and may be overprotec-tive or over-involved in his life (Brown et al., 1962). A family thatis low in EE tends to be more caring and accepting, and lessenmeshed in the sufferer’s life.The level of EE in the family plays an important role in what
happens to the schizophrenic person. Schizophrenic people whohave families that are high in EE are more likely to suffer a relapseof symptoms (ﬁgure 15.6). This association between EE andrelapse is also true for a number of other disorders.
Caring for a schizophrenic family member is a stressful, tiring
undertaking, which can, in itself, lead to high EE behaviours. For-tunately, psycho-educational programmes can help families andtheir schizophrenic relatives learn better ways of communicat-ing. These programmes, in conjunction with appropriate medica-tion for the sufferer, can lower relapse rates (e.g. Leff et al., 1982;McFarlane et al., 1995).
MOOD DISORDERS – DEPRESSION
Although mood disorders have some symptoms in common,they are very different in terms of their prevalence and causes.
Major depressive disorder, also called unipolar depression, is
one of the most common of these disorders, whereas bipolar dis-order (also known as manic-depression), like schizophrenia, is lessprevalent.
Both disorders often result in severe impairment. Figure 15.7
shows that depression results in as much impairment as commonphysical health problems, if not more.
Symptoms of major depressive disorder
The primary symptom of major depressive disorder is, not sur-prisingly, a depressed or sad mood. Almost everyone experiencesa sad mood some time in their life, but major depressive disordergoes much further than simply feeling sad. Other symptoms include:
nLosing interest or pleasure in things that you usually enjoy– an experience called anhedonia.psychosocial factors psychological,
environmental and social factors thatmay play a role in psychopathology
expressed emotion (EE) speciﬁc set 
of feelings and behaviours directed at people with schizophrenia by their family members
% relapsing in 9–12 months
High EE Low EE100
908070605040302010
0
Bipolar disorderAlcoholism Depression
Schizophrenia
Figure 15.6
Expressed emotion and relapse. Across many disorders, peoples and their causes, but also to discover new ones.FINAL THOUGHTS
Summary
nThe ﬁeld of abnormal psychology, or psychopathology, deals with sets of behaviours, or symptoms, that result in impairment
in people’s lives. These sets of symptoms constitute psychological disorders or mental illness.
nAlthough the deﬁnition of ‘abnormal behaviour’ is sensitive to a number of contextual factors, psychological disorders (e.g.schizophrenia) have been documented across time and culture.
nThroughout history, the causes of abnormal behaviour have been construed from a number of different perspectives, each ofwhich tells us something unique about different aspects of psychological disorders.
nBiological/genetic models focus on brain defects, biochemical imbalances and genetic predispositions as causes of psychopathology.
nIn contrast, Freudian, contemporary psychodynamic and attachment models focus on the effects of early parent–child experiences.
nBehavioural models focus on the learning experiences that result in psychopathology, whereas cognitive models focus on theeffect of distorted thought processes.
nOther perspectives integrate various models. The diathesis–stress perspective suggests that the factors identiﬁed by each of th e
other models may work in accordance with one another, so that psychopathology only results when certain combinations offactors (e.g. genetic, environmental) are present.
nSimilarly, the developmental psychopathology perspective provides a framework for understanding how psychopathologydevelops from childhood to adulthood.
nThese perspectives can help us understand the numerous disorders documented in nosologies such as the DSM-IV and theICD-10.PSY_C15.qxd  1/2/05  3:43 pm  Page 334Revision Questions 335335
FURTHER READING
Clarkin, J.F., & Lenzenweger, M.F. (1996). Major Theories of Personality Disorder . New York: Guilford Press.
A historical overview of many of the most prominent theories of personality disorders.
Hammen, C. (1997). Depression . Hove: Psychology Press/Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates.
Research-based information on causes and treatments of depression from various theoretical viewpoints.
Jamison, K.R. (1996). An Unquiet Mind . New York: Random House.
The author’s personal account of her battle with bipolar disorder.
Leonard, K.E., & Blane, H. (1999). Psychological Theories of Drinking and Alcoholism . 2nd edn. New York: Guilford Press.
Recent reviews of all of the major psychological and genetic/biological theories of alcoholism.
Nasar, S. (1988). A Beautiful Mind . New York: Simon & Schuster.
Biography of John Forbes Nash, Jr, a mathematical genius whose career was cut short by schizophrenia and who miraculously recov ered
and was honoured with a Nobel Prize.
Rachman, S. (1998). Anxiety . Hove: Psychology Press/Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates.
Psychological approaches to the conceptualization and treatment of anxiety disorders, drawing on recent empirical work.
Zuckerman, M. (1999). Vulnerability to Psychopathology: A Biosocial Model . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Describes how psychopathology can be understood from a diathesis–stress perspective, emphasizing interactions between biology/g enetics,
personality and stressful life events.
Contributing authors:
Joanne Davila & Frank D. Fincham1. Do mental disorders reﬂect brain dysfunction and genetic abnormalities? If so, does this mean that
biological interventions (e.g. drugs) would necessarily be the treatment of choice?
2. There are several models of abnormal behaviour. Discuss the extent to which they can be integrated.
In particular, do psychodynamic models share any common ground with behavioural and cognitivemodels?
3. Do you think that the origins of mental disorders in adulthood can be found in childhood? What should
we look for in childhood as precursors of adult abnormal behaviour?
4. Imagine you had the power to create a human being with a mental disorder. What disorder would you
give them so that they were: (a) maximally dysfunctional; (b) minimally dysfunctional; (c) had the bestchance of recovering from the disorder? Discuss why you made the choices that you did.
5. A friend hears that you are studying abnormal psychology and comes to ask you about some experi-
ences she or he has had, wanting to know if they are signs of mental disorder. What would you do?What would you tell him or her?
6. Why are some disorders more common than others? What might be some of the cultural, societal,
and biological reasons involved?
7. What kinds of things do the different disorders discussed in this chapter have in common? 8. Does it make sense to think about these disorders as exemplifying different categories of disorder?
Or are there underlying problems that characterize all of these disorders?REVISION QUESTIONSPSY_C15.qxd  1/2/05  3:43 pm  Page 335